TIM MCLEAN: Morning folks, it's um Thursday
the 6th of February. Middle of a ghost town
here. Everyone is hiding. It's dire here.
It's very dire. There's people dropping on
the footpath, literally. Ok? I can't wait
to get out of here, it's terrible.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: A city of 11 million
people in lockdown.
STEPHEN MCDONELL, BBC CHINA CORRESPONDENT:
So here I am, sitting at home and reporting
from where I live. That's because after returning
from Hubei province at the heart of the coronavirus
outbreak, everybody's told you need to go
into quarantine, you can't be exposed to others
for several weeks...
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: More than two-thousand
dead, tens of thousands infected. Rising anger
over how the crisis is being handled.
RICHARD MCGREGOR, EAST ASIA SENIOR FELLOW,
LOWY INSTITUTE: Local officials in Wuhan did
withhold information. The doctors in Wuhan
who were talking about it were explicitly
told to shut up.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: And scientists racing
to find a vaccine.
PROFESSOR TREVOR DREW, DIRECTOR, CSIRO AUSTRALIAN
ANIMAL HEALTH LABORATORY: We just don't know
how this outbreak is going to develop or how
many people are ultimately going to be infected,
or ultimately going to die from this disease.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Tonight on 4 Corners,
how the coronavirus outbreak sparked a global
emergency.
TIM MCLEAN: I'm absolutely fucking petrified.
The police are actually knocking on doors
and taking temperatures and if people have
a temperature, they're dragging them out.
You don't get a fucking say in it. You don't
get an option.
YING WANG: Wuhan is a very, very beautiful
charming and bustling city in central China.
It sits on the banks of the Yangtze River.
It's a mega city. Wuhan is also home to the
second most number of universities in China.
People around the world come to Wuhan to study.
STEPHEN MCDONELL, BBC CHINA CORRESPONDENT
It's right in the heart of the country, geographically
as well as economically. Because all these
trains and plains are coming through there.
To have the outbreak start there, it's almost
like if you wanted to pick the worst place
for it to break out in, that would be the
place you'd release it.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: In early December,
people in Wuhan begin falling ill with a  mystery virus.
PROFESSOR SHARON LEWIN, DIRECTOR, DOHERTY
INSTITUTE: The first infections in Wuhan started
in early December, and I believe the first
case in December the 1st. When a new infectious
disease appears, it does take a little time
to register and become aware that it's new.
Um, so there were people presenting with a
form of pneumonia.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Local doctors suspect
the virus originated in the city's seafood
and wildlife market.
PROFESSOR RAINA MACINTYRE, HEAD, BIOSECURITY
PROGRAM, UNSW KIRBY INSTITUTE: So, we think
the virus probably originated from bats, because
that's what the genetic data tell us, but
often there's an intermediary animal host.
In this case they think pangolins might be
implicated, which are a mammal, and that intermediary
animal host might have been at the markets.
We don't think that it's from eating those
things specifically, like through the gastrointestinal
tract, but more from handling them, from touching
the contaminated meat. So, somewhere in that
market we believe there must have been a contaminated animal source that infected
the first cluster of humans.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: In late December
as the number of cases increases, doctors
in Wuhan begin sharing information in a private
chat group.
STEPHEN MCDONELL, BBC CHINA CORRESPONDENT:
Well before any of us knew about the coronavirus,
there were people who tried to sound the alarm.
So, there were a group of whistle blowers
who'd heard that there was this virus cluster,
and they started speaking about it. Now, in
particular, there was one doctor, Li Wenliang.
He posted on a chat group with his former
university classmates, that people had been
coming into his university with what he thought
was the SARS virus.
VOICEOVER (starts in Chinese, then in English):
7 SARS cases were confirmed in the Huanan
seafood market. The main mode of transmission
of the virus is droplet transmission at close
range or contact with respiratory secretions
of patients. This can cause a special pneumonia
that is evidently contagious and capable of
affecting multiple organ systems. It is also
called SARS. The patients were isolated in
the emergency department of our hospital.
Everyone please be careful.
VOICEOVER: That's scary. SARS is back?
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: The outbreak revived
the spectre of SARS, another type of coronavirus
which killed 774 people in 2002 and 2003.
PROFESSOR SHARON LEWIN, DIRECTOR, DOHERTY
INSTITUTE: The reason why they would have
been so concerned at the prospect is this
was SARS, was threefold. First of all, SARS
was super infectious. Second, it had a relatively
high mortality rate of 10%. And third, a large
number of healthcare workers actually died
from SARS because of the complexity with stopping
transmission and I think that was the real
concern.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: On the same day as
Dr Li's warning, the Wuhan Health Commission
sends an urgent internal notice to hospitals
on the treatment of pneumonia of unknown cause.
VOICEOVER (starts in Chinese, then in English):
Some medical institutions in our city have
seen patients steadily with pneumonia of unknown
cause. If you find patients with unexplained
pneumonia, actively adjust the resources and
treat them on the spot.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: The notice warns
them to keep the outbreak quiet.
VOICEOVER: Without authorisation, no units
or individuals shall release treatment related
information to the outside.
DR WU QIANG, CHINESE POLITICAL COMMENTATOR:
I have no doubt that local governments have
reported the situation to the central government.
So local governments were not accountable
to the people at that time, but to the central
government. They adopted a policy of concealing
the truth from the public but starting to
control the epidemic internally. This contradiction
prevented them from properly mobilizing to
deal with the spread of the epidemic.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Dr Li and the other
doctors continue to share information.
VOICEOVER: Be careful. The WeChat group of
our class has been banned. The latest news
is the coronavirus infection has been confirmed,
and virus classification is in progress. Please
don't spread the word and ask your family
and loved ones to take precautions.
VOICEOVER: Do not go to the Huanan seafood
market in the near future.
RICHARD MCGREGOR, EAST ASIA SENIOR FELLOW,
LOWY INSTITUTE: So when this group of doctors,
I think they were university classmates from
Wuhan, began sharing the information they
had about a strange new virus on this joint
WeChat group, they were doing what
you'd expect medical professionals to do. To
try and sort of pool information and see what
was actually happening. But of course that's
a kind of dangerous thing to do in China.
I think there's little doubt right now that
local officials in Wuhan did withhold information.
They've admitted as much. The doctors in Wuhan
who were talking about it, were explicitly
told to shut up.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Dr Li and his colleagues
are hauled in for questioning by Wuhan police.
VOICEOVER: After investigation and verification
by the public security organs, eight offenders
have been summoned and handled according to
law. The police will investigate and punish
with zero tolerance those illegal acts that
fabricate and spread rumours and
disrupt social order.
STEPHEN MCDONELL, BBC CHINA CORRESPONDENT:
Doctor Li was disciplined by his own hospital.
He was even picked up by the police and taken
in, and castigated and told not to spread
rumours. This is what happens when you are
saying things publicly that the Communist
Party doesn't like. You're spreading rumours.
Even if somebody is trying to tell the world
about a potentially dangerous virus, the first
instinct is to shut them up.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Despite the risk
of retribution, critics like Dr Wu Qiang,
who already lost his university job for defying
a ban by President Xi on teaching democracy,
continue to speak out over the government's
handling of the crisis.
DR WU QIANG, CHINESE POLITICAL COMMENTATOR:
They were basically concealing the truth;
although internal controls were in place,
the information kept from the public caused
the outbreak of the disaster and the spread
of the disease.
RICHARD MCGREGOR, EAST ASIA SENIOR FELLOW,
LOWY INSTITUTE: That's the key point in this
saga. They lost about two weeks, maybe three
weeks, just when the virus was at it's sort
of nascent point, just at a time where they
could have traced it, just at a time where
perhaps they could have checked it more substantially.
But that was lost because it got caught up
in the politics of the information flow and
information surveillance in China.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Four weeks after
the first infections, China notifies the World
Health Organisation of the outbreak.
Things are about to get worse. In early January,
millions of Chinese are preparing to travel
to and from Wuhan to celebrate Chinese New
Year with their families.
STEPHEN MCDONELL, BBC CHINA CORRESPONDENT:
If you were to pick the most dangerous time,
the worst time, for a virus to break out here,
the, the worst time for it to spread quickly
across China and even around the world, it
would be the lunar new year. You have hundreds
of millions of people criss-crossing China,
travelling overseas. And because of that mass
migration, the largest mass migration annually
in the world, I mean, it, it was just a terrible
time for this virus outbreak to, to happen.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Australian resident
Ying Wang who lives in Melbourne, is preparing
to visit Wuhan with her husband and two children
when she hears about the outbreak.
YING WANG: It was a couple of days after our
Christmas holiday in Melbourne, I got a video
sent over from my cousin in Wuhan and according to
the video there was a suspected SARS-like
pneumonia and I asked my cousin should I cancel
my trip? We waited until probably the first
week in January and then there was an official
announcement from our local government back
in Wuhan saying that the disease was controllable
and then we sort of, I feel relieved, so we
went on with our trip.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Ying Wang and her
family arrive in Wuhan on January 9. That
same day a 61-year-old man who had visited
the seafood market becomes the first person
to die of coronavirus. His death is kept quiet
for two days.
DR WU QIANG, CHINESE POLITICAL COMMENTATOR:
During the most crucial time of the spread
of disease in early Jan, Wuhan and Hubei were
holding annual political meetings. As a result,
the first death which occurred on January
9 was not announced until January 11. After
January 11 the data on deaths and confirmed
cases plateaued and the numbers had not changed
at all. I believe that the local authorities
concealed the truth from the public due to
political concerns.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: On January 22, the
government finally acknowledges the gravity
of the situation at a press conference in
Beijing.
LI BIN, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, NATIONAL HEALTH COMMISSION OF CHINA: The virus might mutate and the epidemic
is at risk of spreading further. It is currently
the Spring Festival travel rush season, when
the mobility of the general public increases
sharply, which has heightened the risk of
epidemic transmission and the difficulty of
prevention and control. We must not take it
lightly and be highly vigilant.
NEWSREADER: Nine people have died and 440
people have contracted a mysterious coronavirus,
as China works to stop it spreading during
the lunar new year travel rush.
YING WANG: It was, 22nd, 22nd of January,
that was the turning point. It was Wednesday
and just bad news started coming in,
starting with the Chinese official news saying
that it's getting, getting much worse
than they expected and then all of a
sudden, I think it was the next day 23rd,
I remember, I woke up quite late like 10:00 AM
and suddenly, my dad just told
me, oh, we can't go out now. We can't go out.
We can't get out our apartment.
NEWSREADER: There's been a dramatic development
this morning in the Chinese city of Wuhan
which is the epicentre of an outbreak of a
deadly new virus. All public transport, buses,
trains, ferries and the airport have been
shut down as authorities scramble to contain
the spread of the coronavirus.
STEPHEN MCDONELL, BBC CHINA CORRESPONDENT:
I mean, when the authorities decided to lock
down that whole province of Hubei. That's
like locking down the entire population of
Italy and telling them you can't leave that
province. It was really the moment when everybody
knew, all right, this is a big problem.
PROFESSOR SHARON LEWIN, DIRECTOR, DOHERTY
INSTITUTE: When Wuhan went into lockdown,
I think January the 23rd and then flights
and greater lockdown measures across China.
This is unprecedented in the history of modern
medicine. We've never tried. We know that
containment can work, but it's never really
been done at this large scale.
YING WANG: The day I learned that Wuhan
was in lockdown and I felt quite shocked
and I start immediately start worrying about
food, food supply. And I had to stop everything
on that day. Just started messaging everybody
to find out is that really the official news.
How serious is this announcement?
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: By late January,
Wuhan's hospitals are struggling to cope,
and medical staff are under intolerable pressure.
NURSE: I can't take it anymore! (Screams)
MALE HOSPITAL WORKER: We don't want to live
anymore.
Look at it yourselves.
What on earth do you want to do?
I don't want people, you take them away. Take away that one lying on the floor
. Otherwise, you'd better kill me.
Let me out of here, send me home.
I'm not creating trouble. So many lying there, what can I do?
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: With patient numbers
surging, construction begins on two new hospitals,
with one scheduled to open in just over a
week.
NEWSREADER: Even though Chinese authorities
have shut down several cities, the world health
organisation says it's not yet a global health
emergency.
PROFESSOR RAINA MACINTYRE, HEAD, BIOSECURITY
PROGRAM, UNSW KIRBY INSTITUTE: So, obviously
the whole world was watching very closely
through January as this epidemic unfolded,
and people were very concerned. A lot of experts
were concerned and felt that the Public Health
Emergency of International Concern should
have been declared earlier. I think people
were harking back to Ebola and what happened
there, and they were afraid of delays that
might have been very costly in terms of the
ability to save people's lives.
NEWSREADER: Australia's first case of coronavirus
has been confirmed in Victoria, as New South
Wales announces it has two probable cases.
DR MIKE CATTON, CO-DEPUTY DIRECTOR, DOHERTY
INSTITUTE: So, the minute we made the diagnosis
of the first case in Australia, we knew how
significant that was and we knew that we wanted
to culture the virus.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: In a major breakthrough,
Australian scientists become the first outside
China to isolate the virus in a laboratory.
DR MIKE CATTON, CO-DEPUTY DIRECTOR, DOHERTY
INSTITUTE: Okay, it's definitely growing.
It started at 30, so that's three long. So,
a thousand times stronger. Awesome. So, it's
definitely growing. So, we've got it. Fantastic.
Yep.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: CSIRO scientists
begin growing the virus in their highest security
laboratory, reserved for the most deadly pathogens.
PROFESSOR TREVOR DREW, DIRECTOR, CSIRO AUSTRALIAN ANIMAL HEALTH LABORATORY: We don't actually
know how dangerous this virus is. We know
it kills people, but we don't know how many,
and we don't know exactly what the mechanism
is by which this virus kills people. So at
the moment we're taking the highest level
of precautions.
DR ROB GRENFELL, DIRECTOR OF HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY, CSIRO: Our staff can only usually work about
four hours in those suits and in those conditions,
because it's very stressful to imagine you're
actually working with such high volatile agents.
PROFESSOR TREVOR DREW, DIRECTOR, CSIRO AUSTRALIAN ANIMAL HEALTH LABORATORY: So the most important
thing that we're doing at the moment is growing
the virus to produce more of it so that we
can understand more about the characteristics
of this virus, and also how it behaves in
a biological model so that we can see the
progress of the disease.
DR ROB GRENFELL, DIRECTOR OF HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY, CSIRO: So, we will then introduce the virus
into our test animals, on this occasion ferrets,
because their respiratory system is very similar
to humans. And the idea here is to understand
how that infection progresses and how it behaves.
This is very important for us to understand
because if we can't understand how the
infection progresses and in which way it progresses
we can't understand how vaccines work.
SCIENTIST: So, I think this will be ready
to harvest tomorrow.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: In China, the escalating
number of infections prompts a rare outburst
of anger online against authorities.
WUHAN RESIDENT: I want to fucking ask, can
you find another country on this planet that
is such fucking bullshit?
Can you find another country on this planet, another government
to fuck shit up like this? Wuhan is like fucking
hell right now. To see them just drop dead
or all kinds of scenarios, all those tragedies.
Today is the first day of the Lunar New Year.
It should have been a happy time. Can you
say that the Wuhan people or Chinese people
feel happy now?
DR WU QIANG, CHINESE POLITICAL COMMENTATOR:
It can be said that the more than 900 million
Chinese citizens who are equipped with smart
phones have been extremely dissatisfied with
the situation of Wuhan pneumonia in the past
one month or so. From my own observation,
this level of dissatisfaction is unprecedented
in the past eight years. They have been tremendously
dissatisfied with Wuhan local government's
ineffectiveness in epidemic and disaster relief,
the predicament the Wuhan people have been
put into from the city lockdown, the paralysis
of the local medical institutions, and the
huge risk they have to face.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: As authorities desperately
try to stop the virus spreading, Wuhan is
effectively cut off from the rest of China.
STEPHEN MCDONELL, BBC CHINA CORRESPONDENT:
We decided to go into Hubei province to have
a look what it was like, right inside the
virus hot zone.
As we got closer and closer to Hubei, the road
blocks were becoming more serious, and in
fact looked like something out of an apocalyptic
movie. The police are making all the cars
pull over to the side.
STEPHEN MCDONELL, BBC CHINA CORRESPONDENT:
So basically, that's the border that way.
The police have told us that we can drive
in but we can't drive out.
STEPHEN MCDONELL, BBC CHINA CORRESPONDENT:
We drove through a series of ghost towns.
I mean, nobody on the streets, shops closed,
the shutters were down. And this is during
Spring festival. Normally this is a time when
you'd have fireworks, families, friends gathering
to have meals together, celebrating, being
happy, and instead it was completely dead,
and in fact, pretty eerie.
NEWSREADER: The outbreak of the coronavirus
in China has finally been declared a global
health emergency after a rapid escalation
in the number of infections during the past
week. There are almost 8,000 cases in 18 countries,
including 9 in Australia.
STEPHEN MCDONELL, BBC CHINA CORRESPONDENT:
So here I am, sitting at home and reporting
from where I live. That's because after returning
from Hubei province at the heart of the coronavirus
outbreak, everybody's told you need to go
into quarantine, you can't be exposed to others
for several weeks. This city, Beijing, if
I look out the window, it's dead. I mean,
there are hardly any people in the streets.
Friends here don't want to go outdoors. That's
because they're afraid of catching the coronavirus,
and the same is happening all over the countries,
all these mega-cities in China.
NEWSREADER: The government is taking drastic
action to stem the coronavirus. Foreign nationals
coming from China are now banned from entering
the country.
PROFESSOR RAINA MACINTYRE, HEAD, BIOSECURITY
PROGRAM, UNSW KIRBY INSTITUTE: I think from
a disease control point of view, we want to
continue these for as long as is feasible.
There's just so many major economic consequences
of the travel ban that I think at some point
we'll have to make the decision to lift the
bans, but if we can keep them going as long
as possible, that will be beneficial from
a disease control point of view.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Hundreds of Australians
remain trapped in Hubei province.
YING WANG: So, this is the view from my window,
and it's been really good weather today, but
we're not going out. And this is our central
garden on level six. So, it's a bit shame
that we're stuck at home, otherwise it could
be a really good day out.
YING WANG: I really just want a more firm
answer from anywhere really, from WHO or,
or, or my local government. So how, how bad
really is? I- I'm still having this question.
How serious is this whole pandemic? Even though
everyday we watch the numbers, infected number
of people, also the death toll keep going
up. Just, yeah, I need to, I don't
know, I need someone to assure me this is
some ... I don't know, I feel like the end of the world.
TIM MCLEAN: Morning folks. It's Thursday 6th February.
Middle of a ghost town here.
1.3 million people all hiding.
It's raining, it's a miserable day.
Death toll is, what, 545 today.
Um, 16,800-odd people
in hospital in my district.
Waiting on DFAT to give us an answer about when I can get out of here.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Australian Tim McLean
is stranded on the outskirts of Wuhan. He's
trying to get his Chinese partner a visa to
come to Australia.
TIM MCLEAN: Um, Foreign Affairs just contacted
me. I just hung up the phone. Um, they just
confirmed, and wanted to let me know, that my spouse Xu Qiong didn't make the
list for the flight with Qantas, and asked
me if I was still interested in leaving.
I informed them that I'm not leaving without her.
It's dire here. It's very dire. There's
queues outside the hospitals now. We're not
allowed near them. There's people dropping
on the footpath, literally. Okay?  I know
how bad it is. I can't wait to get out
of here. It's- it's terrible.
TIM MCLEAN: So, this is them spraying outside
our front door, they have been doing this
through the city regularly.
The local council have been going out and spraying disinfectant around everybody's doorways.
So I suspect they're spraying to stop infections coming
out of the sewer.
I better go in and shut the door.
I've seen medical folks turn up
two doors away from me, 20 metres from my
front door, and take a lady away that was
infected. They also took her son.
The son returned home 24 hours later; he was okay.
We haven't seen or heard of the lady since.
PROFESSOR RAINA MACINTYRE: So, people
have been concerned about the human rights
aspects of quarantine and isolation of
cases, quarantine of contacts, et cetera, and
that's been happening on a very large scale
in China but also in Australia and other countries.
From a disease control point of view, putting
aside other issues, from a disease control
point of view it works.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Videos emerge on social media
of authorities using increasingly drastic measures.
RESIDENT (in Mandarin): Forced quarantine.
The whole family of four. Go. Hurry up. Leave.
No filming allowed.
Go.
What are you doing?
Can you leave me alone?
- Get in there.
- No.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Around China, residents
post scenes claiming officials are welding
the doors of apartment buildings shut so people
can't get out.
Woman (in Mandarin): Hey look, is that the
door? They are welding the door. That's a
door in the middle, look.
Terrible.
They are welding the door, not allowing people to get out.
Next will be our block, Block 6.
TIM MCLEAN: I'm very concerned about getting
this virus. I'm not even 100 metres away from
one of the hospitals that's full. I've
seen people entering that hospital. I've seen,
people getting rolled out on stretchers
out of that hospital. It's literally across
the road from where I come out of my apartment.
Now, that's concerning.
My hospitals here are full. We've run out of medical supplies here.
There's no PPE, or personal protective equipment available anymore,
so the doctors have all gone to the bigger hospitals.
They're shipping our sick and our, you know, the people that are in bad condition, they're
taking them to Wuhan. The Wuhan hospitals
are also full now.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: By early February
the virus is in 25 countries,
with 216 cases outside China.
PROFESSOR TREVOR DREW: The most likely
way that the virus is traveling outside of
China is by infected people. So these people,
they are perhaps in the early stages of the
disease and perhaps not showing very many
clinical signs. So, they are able to get onto
planes and they're quite happy to travel,
and in all innocence they are spreading the
disease as they travel.
PROFESSOR NEIL FERGUSON, EPIDEMIOLOGIST, IMPERIAL COLLEGE LONDON: We think 10% or less
of all infections in china are being detected at the current time. We estimate that up to 50,000
new infections a day occur in China, which
is obviously much larger than the
official case numbers.
NEWSREADER: Almost 4,000 passengers, including
more than 200 Australians, have spent their
first 24 hours officially in quarantine on
board a cruise ship off Japan. They'll be
isolated on board for the next fortnight,
with some passengers growing anxious as their
crucial medicines are beginning to run out.
PROFESSOR RAINA MACINTYRE: We know that cruise ships
are at high risk for outbreaks.
It's well documented that you get outbreaks
of influenza, norovirus, gastro and so on,
on cruise ships. They are closed small communities
in a very small space compared to, say, a
country. So obviously you can get more intense
transmission once an outbreak starts.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Shocking news breaks
that the man who had first warned of the outbreak
has died of coronavirus.
NEWSREADER: In China, censors are working
overtime to contain an outpouring of anger
and grief over the death of the doctor who
blew the whistle on the coronavirus crisis.
Li Wenliang died from the virus in a Wuhan
hospital five weeks after being punished by
authorities for warning others of a dangerous
new virus.
RICHARD MCGREGOR, EAST ASIA SENIOR FELLOW,
LOWY INSTITUTE: There was a huge outpouring
of grief, anger, frustration, on Chinese social
media. And not just from so-called netizens
on Chinese-style Reddit forums or something,
but from the Supreme Court of China who put
out a statement saying that, you know, these
doctors were heroes, they should have been
allowed to do their job.
DR WU QIANG, CHINESE POLITICAL COMMENTATOR:
The public intellectuals and the public both
realised that Dr Li represents the conscience
of China. He was suppressed from the beginning
from telling the truth. He could have saved
the livelihood of tens of thousands of people,
or thousands of people's lives. But all this
was concealed due to the authority's suppression
of free speech. I believe the public expressed
their dissatisfaction with the government
by commemorating him.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: The death toll reaches
a critical milestone ... numbers
overtaking the killed by SARS.
HOSPITAL WORKER (in Mandarin): How can we
take any more patients in here?
What else can we do? I don't know what you can do.
What about these patients lying here?
Many patients are lying on the ground. It is full here.
Woman (in Mandarin): Three bodies have been
lying here all morning.
Some of them died in the middle of the night.
But until now, nobody has come to handle it.
Doctors and nurses are all working under these conditions
WUHAN HOSPITAL WORKER (in Mandarin): Okay
you have seen him, just keep going.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: After being conspicuously
absent, President Xi emerges on state media
to assert his authority.
XI JINPING, CHINESE PRESIDENT: Ni Hao! Let's
not shake hands in this special time. But
we must have confidence that we will overcome
this crisis.
RICHARD MCGREGOR: Xi has really lost control
of the narrative, and he's struggling to get
it back. Now if that goes on, if they don't
get on top of the virus, then that can really
damage his image I think, even with ordinary
Chinese people, and that has potentially profound
implications, because two, three years down
the track, when he's meant to be reappointed,
maybe his enemies will use this against him.
DR WU QIANG, CHINESE POLITICAL COMMENTATOR:
So, the people directed this kind of dissatisfaction
directly to Xi himself and Xi's style of governance
which is I believe the most serious threat
to Xi Jinping. This is because the foundation
of his power is based largely on populism
and the loss of this populist foundation will
undoubtedly destabilise his position in the party.
NEWSREADER: Australians still trapped in the
coronavirus epicentre in China  are tonight preparing
for a second attempt at an evacuation flight
to Darwin.
TIM MCLEAN: There is a seat available for
my partner Qiong and myself on the next available
flight out of Wuhan, which apparently is leaving
at midnight tonight. We've got three or
four hours to get to the airport. They've
sent us- sent us all our passes, et cetera,
so we can get through the checkpoints. It's all confirmed. We've got the emails.
We've got the thumbs up. So, we're out of
here. We're heading home.
Can't wait. And super excited.
YING WANG: So, today's our last day in Wuhan.
It's been a pretty long journey the past two
weeks. More than two weeks we've been quarantined
for more than two weeks. So, tomorrow we're
going to get out and go to the airport and
come back to Australia. So, it's still, it's
still unreal for me.
YING WANG: Reaching the airport toll gate,
looks like we are in the checkpoint.
It's 2.30, kids are not asleep. I'm super tired.
We're still waiting. About half of the plane
still waiting to be cleared of security and
passport control and stuff.
A lot of paperwork, a lot of screening, a lot of questions.
Just very, very stressful really.
Let's go! Out of here! Yes, we're out of
here, going home.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Tim McLean isn't
on the flight. Quarantine restrictions mean
he hasn't been able to get any transport to
the airport. So, he's still stuck in Hubei province.
TIM MCLEAN: I'm absolutely fucking petrified
now. 1300 odd people are dead here.
The police are actually knocking on doors and taking temperatures and if people have got a temperature,
they're dragging them out, mate. You don't
get a fucking say in it.
You don't get an option.
You get taken away and put with a bunch of other sick people.
Not only are we in quarantine but it's beyond quarantine now.
It's... I don't even know what to call it.
It's quite terrifying knowing that people
can knock on your door here and drag you out for
no reason at all, because you've got a temperature.
PROFESSOR SHARON LEWIN, DIRECTOR, DOHERTY
INSTITUTE: At the moment we don't have a good
understanding of the real mortality rate for
the novel coronavirus. It's estimated about
2 per cent. So if the mortality rate is 2%,
if it's 1%, even if it's 0.5% and 300 million
people get infected, that's a lot of people
that could potentially die. Because if you
think back into the Spanish flu, enormous
numbers of people died, but the actual mortality
rate was less than 1% but a huge number of
people were infected.
WOMAN: Help! My mother is dying! Someone come
quickly! I have no way out!
There is really no way out!
Everyone, please help me! I have
no other way!
NEWSREADER: The World Health Organisation
is this morning warning that the coronavirus
could pose a greater global threat than terrorism.
DR TEDROS ADHANOM GHEBREYESUS, WORLD HEALTH ORGANISATION: A virus can have
more powerful consequences than any terrorist
action. And that's true. And if the world
doesn't want to wake up and consider this
enemy virus as public enemy number one, I
don't think we will learn from our lessons.
PROFESSOR TREVOR DREW: We just don't know
how this outbreak is going to develop, or
how many people are ultimately going to be
infected, or ultimately going to die from
this disease. We don't yet know exactly how
the virus is evolving. We don't know
how many people are actually infected that
are not revealed to be infected. And we don't know how many people are dying that are misdiagnosed
as dying from  other disease. So, this
is a real problem for us to be able to make
any real prediction, or to model the spread
of this disease.
PROFESSOR SHARON LEWIN: I think the worst case scenario
is that we are unable to contain the virus,
that we see sustained human-to-human transmission
in many parts of the world.
NEWSREADER: The World Health Organisation
says the window of opportunity to contain
the coronavirus outbreak is narrowing. The
statement comes as concerns grow in South
Korea and the Middle East about the number
of cases. There have also been more cases
confirmed among Australians evacuated from
a cruise ship in Japan.
TIM MCLEAN: So, I really don't know what the
near future is going to bring. We've got no
information about how long we're going to
be in here. There's no indication whatsoever.
I've got sick people living next door to me,
I've got sick people above me, I've got sick
people across the lane from me. Some of those
people have got chains on their doors so people
can't access them because they're ill. I'm
hiding from a virus that you can't see and
a government that you don't want to muck around
with.